<?xml version="1.0" ?>
<?xml-stylesheet 
	href="/usr/share/sgml/docbook/xsl-stylesheets-1.62.4/html/docbook.xsl" 
	type="text/xsl"?>

<book lang="en">
    <bookinfo>
        <title>Mapcraft</title>

        <authorgroup>
            <author>Samuel Penn</author>
        </authorgroup>

        <copyright>
            <year>2004</year>
            <holder>Samuel Penn</holder>
        </copyright>

        <legalnotice>GNU FDL</legalnotice>

        <date>2004-05-15</date>
        <releaseinfo>1.1</releaseinfo>

        <abstract>
            <para>
                User manual for Mapcraft.
            </para>
        </abstract>
    </bookinfo>

    <chapter id="introduction">
		<title>Introduction</title>

		<para>
			An introduction to using Mapcraft, including a description of
			its terminology and broad functionality.
		</para>

		<sect1>
			<title>What is Mapcraft?</title>

			<para>
				Mapcraft is a Java application for editing tile based maps.
				By tile based it means that the map consists of tiles,
				either <emphasis>square</emphasis> or <emphasis>hexagonal
				</emphasis>, arranged in a two dimensional grid like pixels
				in an image.
			</para>

			<para>
				An alternative way of describing a map is to use vectors and
				objects (lines, curves and filled regions). Mapcraft does
				make use of some of these - roads and rivers overlay on top
				of the tiles as lines, and are not restricted to fitting
				onto the grid. Towns, cities and other <emphasis>things
				</emphasis> are also free floating, and don't need to fit
				to the grid.
			</para>

			<para>
				The basic map however is tile based.
			</para>

			<sect2>
				<title>Map Types and Tile Shapes</title>

				<para>
					The way maps are treated in <productname>Mapcraft
					</productname> depends on how the map has been
					defined. A map of a temple has quite different
					properties to the map of a whole world.
				</para>

				<para>
					There are two basic kinds of map - World maps and
					Local maps. World maps assume a scale where each tile
					is many kilometres across. Local maps assume a scale
					which a tile is only a few metres across.
				</para>

				<para>
					Since a map can be any scale, it is possible to have
					local area maps with a scale of several hundred metres
					per tile. Often though, maps are most useful if they
					are towards one of the extremes.
				</para>

				<para>
					A second option when defining a map is the shape of the
					tiles used. Tiles can be either square or hexagonal. It
					is suggested that local maps use square tiles (this is
					especially true where the map consists of building
					interiors) and world maps use hexagonal tiles. Again
					though, this is not enforced. Hexagonal tiles give a
					more <emphasis>natural</emphasis> look to a map.
				</para>
			</sect2>

			<sect2>
				<title>Terrain and Features</title>

				<para>
					Each map tile has a terrain type associated with it,
					which determines whether it is forest, grassland,
					desert or sea. There are normally several dozen terrain
					types in a map, so the options are quite flexible.
				</para>

				<para>
					Each tile may also have a feature - something that is
					additional to, and modifies, the basic terrain. Common
					examples are hills and mountains.
				</para>

				<para>
					Each tile will have exactly one terrain type and at most
					one feature.
				</para>
			</sect2>

			<sect2>
				<title>Things</title>

				<para>
					<emphasis>Things</emphasis> are objects which may be
					placed anywhere on the map. They may represent towns,
					cities, caves, houses, beds and chairs to give a few
					examples. A thing does not have to fit to the map grid.
					Things have a name associated with them (which may be
					displayed as a label, depending on the type of map),
					as well as zero or more properties which can be used
					to store any amount of information on the object.
				</para>

				<sect3>
					<title>Properties</title>

					<para>
						Properties are user defined items of textual
						information which can be attached to objects on
						the map. Some properties are defined or assumed
						to have a particular meaning (for instance, if a
						city has a property called 'population', then it
						is assumed to be the population of the city.
					</para>

					<para>
						Properties may be accessed programatically, but
						can just be used to store information on the map
						for the user's own use.
					</para>
				</sect3>
			</sect2>

			<sect2>
				<title>Paths</title>

				<para>
					Paths are vector lines which are not restricted to
					the tiles on the map. They are used to implement
					roads and rivers. As for <emphasis>things</emphasis>,
					a path may have any number of properties associated
					with it.
				</para>
			</sect2>


			<sect2>
				<title>Areas</title>

				<para>
					An <emphasis>area</emphasis> is a named region on the
					map. Each tile may belong to an area. If two
					neighbouring tiles belong to different areas, then a
					border will be drawn between them. This allows
					territory of kingdoms and empires to be marked out
					on the map, with borders being automatically
					calculated.
				</para>
			</sect2>

			<sect2>
				<title>Terrain Sets</title>

				<para>
					A terrain set is a predefined collection of terrains,
					features and icons for use in a map. There are a number
					of basic terrain sets which can be selected from when
					a map is first created.
				</para>
			</sect2>
		</sect1>
    </chapter>


</book>
